Landmarking Photos:
What you are doing
You will mark 43 points around the outline of a fish in each still frame, so the color of the same body regions can be compared between fish and over time.

The work for each video goes like this:
1. Open the landmarking window on a folder of frames.
2. Type the fish's label
3. Click the 7 fixed landmarks (snout, fins, tail) on the fish if not already selected.
4. Press SPACE and the tool places the other 36 points along the outline.
5. Check that the color standard is correct, fix it if it is wrong.
6. Check that the scale bar has been properly identified
7. Check the fish's outline, fix anything that is off, then press ENTER for the next frame.

The tool saves these files as you go:
• Landmarks\<frame>_LM.TPS: the 43 points for each frame.
• Landmarks_calib\<frame>_calib_LM.TPS: the 6 colour-standard patches for each frame.
• landmarks.csv: one row per frame, with the fish ID, whether the frame is usable, and how the colour standard was found.
• debug_frames\: a picture of each frame with its points drawn on, for checking.

One-time setup
You need Python, VS Code and two Python packages, and you only do this once per computer. These instructions are for Windows.
    1. Install Python from python.org. On the first screen of the installer, tick Add python.exe to PATH before clicking Install. If you miss this, the commands below will not work.
    2. Install VS Code from code.visualstudio.com and open it.
    3. In VS Code, click the square icon on the left (Extensions), search for Python, and install the one published by Microsoft.
    4. Open the terminal inside VS Code (the next section shows how) and install the two packages the tool uses:
    python -m pip install opencv-python numpy
    5. Check that everything installed:
    python --version
    python -c "import cv2, numpy; print('ready')"
    The second command should print ready. If it prints an error instead, the install in step 4 did not finish; run it again and read the last lines for the cause.
    The progress-tracking scripts (autofill_video_map.py and landmark_tracker.py) need no extra packages.


Opening VS Code and the terminal
Every command in this guide is typed into the VS Code terminal, and it must be opened inside the files folder, the folder that contains find_fish_and_landmarks.py.
    1. In VS Code choose File > Open Folder, pick the files folder, and click Select Folder. If asked whether you trust the authors, click Yes.
    2. Choose Terminal > New Terminal (or press Ctrl + backtick). A panel opens at the bottom of the window.
    3. Look at the last line in that panel. It is called the prompt and should end with files>, for example PS C:\Users\you\...\files>. That tells you the terminal is in the right folder.
    4. Check by typing this and pressing Enter. You should see find_fish_and_landmarks.py in the list:
    dir


Running the script
  1. With the terminal open in the files folder, run this one command. Direct the first path to your own folder, and the second path (after --out) to a new folder where the landmarks will be saved. The program opens every frame that is not yet done, one after another:
    python photo_find_fish_and_landmarks.py folder\frames --out folder\landmarks

  2. The terminal prints a line for each frame, such as --- 3/10: <frame name> ---, and a window opens. If you cannot see the window, look for it in the Windows taskbar, because it can open behind VS Code.

The window has four parts:
• Buttons across the top. Each one has its keyboard shortcut in the corner, and you can click them with a mouse or tap them on a touchscreen.
• A progress header above the buttons: the video name, the fish label, "frame 3 of 10", "video 2 of 57" and a progress bar.
• A "THIS FRAME" checklist at the top right. It lists what is still to do on the current frame (see the next section).
• A message bar along the bottom. It always says what to do next, for example CLICK LANDMARK 1 OF 7: ANTERIOR. When you are unsure, read it.

Stopping and coming back
• To stop, press Q (or ESC) while no label is being typed. This saves landmarks.csv, which lists every frame you have accepted. Later, run the same command again and it skips the finished frames:
N image(s) already done - skipping them.

Two things lose work, so AVOID THESE:
• Closing the window with the X, or pressing Ctrl + C in the terminal. The program ends before landmarks.csv is written, so the frames from that session come up again next time.
• Pressing Q before you press ENTER on a frame. The frame on screen is not saved, so finish it first.

